# smoke dust pigeons weeds
grüß gott
How can we protect the earth from all the destruction humanity has put it through in the past and present and ensure a future with thriving ecosystems?
The first important step for humanity is to not put itself on a pedestal and acknowledge our inextricable connection with nature.
This realization leads to posthumanism, a paradigm shift with roots in feminism, challenging norms that have traditionally sexualized, racialized and naturalized human existence. Posthumanism challenges the anthropocentric thought-space that has led to a decoupling of human actions and their effects on nature. Nature has been seen as a “backdrop” to the life of humans, that can be exploited as much as we want to. Decoupling is a concept developed by economics to resolve the unintended consequences of economic growth. The goal is to continue the growth of the economy while decreasing the use of resources at the same time. In reality however, countries trying to decouple their economic processes mostly end up outsourcing those problems to other countries (Dalziel 2022).
A smaller-scale example for decoupling:

We buy a pair of shoes from a company that doesn’t have high sustainability standards for their production but promise that for your purchase, they will plant a tree somewhere which will offset all the use of resources and CO2 emissions that the creation of your new shoes has caused, so that it has “zero impact” on the environment. Those promises are probably greenwashing, since it is almost impossible to track if the tree is actually planted, if it stays alive long enough to capture a lot of CO2, how it impacts the area it is planted in etc.

So, decoupling doesn’t work and we do annoyingly have to be conscious of the impact of our actions. That can be applied to many areas of life: Dalziel, for example, proposes that the practice of architecture needs a shift away from an anthropocentric perspective. It is not enough to continue building like we are used to, while searching for some more sustainable building materials on the side. Instead, we need to question if humans even have the right to change our environment in the way that we are.

As mentioned above, we as humans are a part of nature. Because of that, it’s delusional to pretend that it’s possible that our actions have zero impact, which is often seen as an end goal for sustainability practices. With a posthuman perspective we can acknowledge that we will always have an impact on nature. Instead, we can shift the focus on positive contributions to the ecosystems we inhabit (Dalziel 2023).

An important concept to ensure a life in balance of humans and nonhuman actors is conviviality. Illich introduced it in 1973 as a counterpoint to industrial productivity. He criticised the alienation of consumers and the production process since industrial production became the standard. His goal for society is justice in decision-making and independence from forced labour and consumption. This should be achieved by equitable redistribution between humans. Nowadays, the term conviviality is used in a variety of contexts. In those contexts, there is a common understanding that conviviality describes living together with differences. Recent interpretations among others include analysis of structural inequality and the impact of overconsumption on society (Krauss 2021).

In the article “Towards convivial conservation” from 2019 by Büscher and Fletcher, they propose a vision for conservation that is in part build on Illich’s book from 1973. They explore conviviality as a tool for envisioning alternative conservation ideas. They also question if it is possible that the idea of convivial conservation plays an important role in decolonization. They are more careful with the latter, since convivial conservation is once again a concept rooted in the Global North, so we shouldn’t be so quick with imposing those ideas on countries in the Global South.

Ideas of conservation are historically rooted in colonial and racialized understandings of human and non-human nature. This perpetuates social and environmental injustices for people working with conservation in the Global South. For instance, the idea of “wild” nature was formulated in the Global North as an opposition to the Industrial Revolution. This separation of humans and nature was then also brought to the Global South. This can have detrimental consequences on local people whose livelihoods can be eliminated by separating the people of the resources for the sake of preserving “wild” nature. This limits the possibilities and use of indigenous knowledge. The knowledge that is the most recognised tends to erase local expertise. “Conscious efforts to acknowledge and empower knowledges and knowledge holders beyond a Western canon are vital in any efforts to decolonize conservation”.
They propose a range of things that should be established to ensure convivial conservation: Firstly, they want to move away from the concept of protected areas that don’t allow any humans in, towards promoted areas, where people are welcome visitors. Secondly, human and nonhuman nature should both be celebrated and their diverse needs and interdependencies recognised. We should also stop to promote certain parts of nature as “spectacular” and incorporate environmentalism more into everyday life instead. Historic reparations are indispensable, i.e. compensating marginalized communities for past injustices perpetrated in the name of conservation, to hopefully give them better possibilities in the future. Generally, people who live in or around protected areas should be especially supported by a conservation basic income to lead a decent life and have the resources to make the best decisions for the areas around them. That way, they aren’t forced to exploit the nature around them more than they should to ensure their survival. Generally, they hope for a change in the economic model: the extraction of natural resources needs to be limited, eventually degrowth is the goal. To watch over those measures, a global coalition for convivial conservation is necessary, that fights for just conservation. In a nutshell, we should no longer accept that nature is used as an excuse to perpetuate existing injustices (Krauss 2021).
Other authors have added more specific points about what urban landscapes should look like to enable conviviality. According to Rodriguez & Simon, it is important to find out what aspects of design make people feel welcomed and integrated. The spaces need to be flexible, inclusive and useful. Those best respond to people’s desires. For the authors, the concept of conviviality helps to envision a future of urban planning. However, for them, conviviality only considers humans and their relationship with each other, not on the relationship with non-humans. It is important for them to further study the relationship between design and user’s conviviality in the future. That will help architects and urban planners to improve public spaces at different scales (Rodriguez & Simon).
One example on how it is impossible to distinguish human and non-human spaces is the biodiversity in cities. Urban biodiversity is starting to gain more recognition. This is expressed by the notion of “living cities”, which challenges the spatial divisions between city and country. To conceptualise this idea, we need to acknowledge that cities are used with but also against their original design. That can mean birds using buildings to build their nests and hunt. The cities were not built for them but they feel at home in them. Urban inhabitants (human and nonhuman) are heterogeneous. They might move in unexpected patterns for example and aren’t static beings. Instead they all participate in shaping the city. To formulate ideas on how to best protect all life in the city it can be helpful to profit off the knowledge of city residents, who spend a big part of their time in specific areas and know what the neighbourhood needs. The knowledge and routines that are developed in connection to specific parts of the city form unique attachments (Hinchcliffe & Whatmore 2006).
In his book “Subnatures” from 2009 Gissen explores the ways nature is instrumentalised in the modern city to fit a certain image. However nature is not something that can be controlled and always finds a way to exist everywhere, even in spaces that humans pretend are only controlled by humans. Gissen selects substances that represent peripheral forms of nature, that are not always perceived as nature: smoke, dust, pigeons and weeds.
We are all aware that those things find their way into a lot of places that individuals would rather lock them out of and illustrate the lack of control we have over the things that exist in space. Some urban planners would give so much to not have pigeons shit on their beautiful new buildings. But it is their home just as much as ours and they will always find a way to exist in human spaces, we can not keep our cities “clean” of those substances (Lada 2023).
The idealised concept of wild nature perpetuates existing injustices and keeps the artificial dichotomy of “human” and “nature” alive. To break down that harmful concept, we need to stop idealizing nature and accept that humans are a part of it. That helps us accept our responsibility for humans as well as non-humans on this earth and strive for a more equal society in the future.

# Sources
Dalziel, M. (2022). Towards a Posthuman Practice for Architecture and Urbanism? Nordic Journal of Urban Studies, (1), 90-96.
Krauss, J. E., (2021) “Decolonizing, conviviality and convivial conservation: towards a convivial SDG 15, life on land?”, Journal of Political Ecology 28(1). 
Lada, A. S. (2023). ‘Posthuman’architecture: Contemporary approaches of the human, technology and nature within the built environment. In Social Practices and City Spaces Routledge, 205-221.
Rodriguez, M. B., & Simon, M. (2015). Conceptualizing conviviality in urban landscapes. Athens Journal of Architecture, 1(4), 311-326.
Steve Hinchliffe & Sarah Whatmore (2006) Living cities: Towards a politics of conviviality, Science as Culture, 15(2), 123-138
